# NYSCF_ScaleFEx: a slim and scalable method to extract fixed features at single cell level in High Content Imaging screens

We have developed ScaleFEx, a Python pipeline that extracts multiple generic fixed features at the single cell level that can be deployed across large high-content imaging datasets with low computation requirements. This pipeline efficiently and reliably computes features related to shape, size, intensity, texture, granularity as well as correlations between channels. Additionally, it allows the measurement of additional features specifically related to mitochondria and RNA only, as they represent important channels with characteristics worth to be measured on their own. The measured features can be used to not only separate populations of cells using AI tools, but also  highlight the specific interpretable features that differ between populations. The authors used ScaleFEx to identify the phenotypic shifts that multiple cell lines undergo when exposed to different compounds. We used a combination of Recursive Feature Elimination, Logistic regression, correlation analysis and dimensionality reduction representations to narrow down to the most meaningful features that described the drug shifts. Furthermore, we used the best scoring features to extract images of cells for each class closest to the average to visually highlight the phenotypic shifts caused by the drugs. Using this approach we were able to identify features linked to the drug shifts in line with literature, and we could visually validate their involvement in the morphological changes of the cells. 
ScaleFEx can be used as a powerful tool to understand the underlying phenotypes of complex diseases and subtle drug shifts, bringing us a step forward to identify and characterize morphological differences at single cell level of the major diseases of our time.

Monoqlo Dataset (DMR0001) © 2021 by NYSCF is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
